1. Check Step: A rock or timber step placed in or across the trail tread and designed to act as both a low dam (to slow water flowing down a trail) and as a step for trail users. 

2. Who put this rock in the trail?  That¡¯s right ¨C that rock is not only intentional, it has a name.  Those big, square, flat-topped rocks set in the trail serve an important purpose beyond acting as a staircase.  Their primary purpose is actually also water control.  What you see as a hiker is usually only the tip of the iceberg ¨C a good check step is set several feet deep and is totally impermeable not only to surface water but to the water that has sunk into the earth.  Without these ¡®steps¡¯ which appear to be exactly what they sound like, steep trails would become ravines and completely erode within a few years. 

3. Check dams are used on pieces of abandoned, trenched tread to arrest further erosion and to hold material placed during site restoration. Sometimes check dams are appropriate for trails in active use. Check dams are intended to slow and hold surface water long enough to deposit transported sediment. They should be used with drainage structures to reduce overall erosion from the abandoned tread. Check dams are best used as holding structures for fill used to recontour the old tread. The material used in the dam should be seated in an excavated footing that extends into the sides of the trench. As material behind the dam naturally builds up, successive levels can be added to the dam with enough batter to offer stability against the pressure of the fill. The top of the dam should be level or slightly higher than the trench walls. For watertightness, chinking and tamped fill should be used to complete the uphill face of the dam. Fill is then added behind the dam to finish the process. It generally takes a long time for these trenches to fill up. Most never do. If they do, add fill below the dam to finish the process.

Spacing between dams depends on the steepness of the old grade and the degree of restoration desired. If the check dam is intended only to slow down erosion, then relatively wide spacing is sufficient (every 20 m (65 ft) on a 25-percent grade). If the intent is for half of the old trench to be filled back in, the bottom of each dam should be level with the top of the next lower dam. On steeper grades the dams need to be closer together. If the intent is to approach complete recontouring of the trench, the dams should be closer still, especially on grades above 25 percent. A point of diminishing returns is reached on grades above 40 percent. Check dams would have to be built right on top of each other to retain soil at the full depth of the trench.