1. Rock fragments ranging from 1/5 to 3 inches in diameter.   

2. Commonly used on more rural trails, gravel is often favored for its more natural look and its affordable front-end installation. Gravel is also easier on runners¡¯ joints and good for flat areas outside of floodplains. This material does have drawbacks, however.

One of the biggest challenges with gravel is that it requires a great deal of maintenance and has a difficulty meeting ADA surface standards. With a gravel trail, it is hard to maintain consistent surface quality, and gravel erosion can cause environmental damage.

For bikers, steep gravel slopes (which also face the issue of gravel migration) and loose gravel are challenging to traverse. While gravel is better in terms of minimizing the impact on runners¡¯ joints, the material has less stability for those on foot, whether they are running or walking.

Gravel is an affordable initial investment, but its frequent required maintenance over time does start to add up. For this reason, presenting a life cycle maintenance chart is a great way to demonstrate long-term planning to a client. 

3. Gravel is a mixture of three sizes or types of material: stone, sand and fines. Too often surface gravel is taken from stockpiles that have actually been produced for other uses. For instance, the gravel could have been produced for use as base or cushion material for a paved road. There are two major differences between surface gravel and base (cushion) material. Good gravel for base courses will generally have larger top-sized stone and a very small percentage of clay or fine material. This is necessary for the strength and good drainability needed in base gravels. This material will not form a crust to keep the material bound together on a gravel road. It will become very difficult to maintain. Other gravel could have been produced simply as fill material for use at building sites. This material often has a high content of sand-sized particles which make it very drainable. This is a desirable characteristic in fill material since water can quickly flow through it and drain away from under building foundations and parking lots. But the same material will remain loose and unstable on a gravel road.What a gravel road needs is sufficient fine material that has a plastic or¡°binding¡±characteristic.