1. Petroleum-based flexible surface material that provides a smoothly paved surface suitable for bicycles and in-line skates. It is preferred in urban areas where trails are often used for commuting to and from work or school.

2. Asphalt works well for bicycle commuters and inline skaters, which is a reason it is often used in urban areas. It typically can¡¯t be used by equestrians. It also requires regular, minor maintenance such as crack patching, yet has a life expectancy of 7 to 15 years. Asphalt is a flexible surface that requires use to remain pliable and will last longer with heavy use. However, those installing asphalt should be conscious of the possibility of environmental contamination during construction.

3. While asphalt doesn¡¯t have the natural look that gravel does, it does have arguably the best initial trail surface ¡ª it is smooth and without cracks. For some projects, asphalt may be a happy medium between gravel and concrete - more sturdy than gravel but cheaper in initial cost than concrete. An asphalt trail surface requires a lot of maintenance over the long haul. Asphalt is prone to cracking, particularly on the edges, thanks to growing vegetation, requiring designers to lay a few extra inches on the width of the trail to act as a buffer. Even then, there is a regular need to fill and seal cracks, and you can expect a complete overlay needed every 8 to 10 years. Crack-filling or sealcoating applications should be expected if an owner wants to extend the life of the asphalt trail.While porous asphalt offers improved drainage, traditional asphalt trails have an impervious surface - impenetrable by water - which can cause issues with water runoff. 

4. Properly designed and installed asphalt trails can provide a long-term service life with lower required maintenance than a ¡°soft surface¡± trail material like mulch or crushed shells. While mulch or loose stone materials will be cheaper to purchase and install, problems with runoff and drainage are common. Also, depending on how the trail will be used by walkers, runners, cyclists, skateboarders, etc. ¨C these soft surface materials may not satisfy the practical recreational requirements of a finished multi use trail surface. Asphalt offers designers more options to comply with ADA design guidelines, with more stability and reliability of the surface itself. designers working to specify an asphalt segment of a multi use trail must consider these areas in building quality asphalt trails: proper drainage, proper sub-grade compaction, adequate pavement thickness, adequate pavement compaction. Asphalt, while a suitable paving material for many multi use trails, carries with it maintenance drawbacks. Fortunately, agency staffs can take care of sealing cracks and other maintenance items on asphalt trails internally. Asphalt doesn¡¯t stay pristine forever; the level of required maintenance will depend on the quality of the asphalt materials, quality of the design, soil conditions and the installing contractor.Civil engineers and landscape architects working with asphalt trail segments are most likely already familiar with asphalt mix design, subgrade design, thickness, placement, and compaction.