1. Wood bark is less desirable due to the unevenness of the surface. All wood products are considered short-life materials due to oxidation and erosion. Crushed bark or Barka-Mulch may also be used as a surface material if it is available in your area. Wood byproduct surfaces do require edging. (Texas Department of State Health)

2. Bark mulch is often used as a soft, casual trail surface. It is generally cheaper than loose gravel or stones, but bark mulch does decompose and wash out ¨C requiring new mulch to be installed every few years. In addition, wet areas or project sites with poor drainage areas will result in a soggy path. Bark mulch is a loose material, so it's not likely to be the best option for multi use paths with high amounts of pedestrian traffic. Bark mulch is often best suited for residential garden trails. 

3. Wood chips blend well with most natural surroundings and are quiet and comfortable to walk on. They are not firm enough for bicycle or special needs trails, and scatter too easily for equestrian trails. If chips are over 75 mm deep, walking is difficult. Wood and bark shreds are similar to chips, but they require less maintenance and compact better to provide a firmer footing. The shreds bind together to form a mat-like surface that allows water infiltration and holds soil particles in place. Wood chips do not compact well and will spread unless the tread is lined with stones or logs. On slopes the chips may become slippery when wet. Avoid using chips on a sloping tread. Chips tend to remain damp and may become slippery. Sawdust compacts fairly well but has the disadvantage of "drawing" moisture from the ground. Avoid wood chips (and shavings) and sawdust on cycling trails or trails for handicapped people.

Consider producing chips on location using mechanical chippers and using branches and saplings cleared from the trail. Avoid cedar wood chips since toxic leachates could enter watercourses. Use hemlock, spruce, pine or fir chips.Specify small and flat chips. Use log or timber stringers at the trail edges to hold the chips in place. Alternatively, grub out organic material to create a bed for the chips. Top-dress the trail once a year to replace rotting chips. If a thick surface is required, use a base of crushed stone or soil cement under the chips.