1. A structure, including supports, erected over a depression (stream, river, chasm, canyon or road) and having a tread or deck for carrying trail traffic.

2.  Bridges typically are the most expensive item on a trail, so it¡¯s important to get them right the first time. Good bridge siting involves many disciplines. It requires careful attention to preliminary engineering, hydraulics and hydrology, trail alignment, and environmental and geomorphic concerns. All of these concerns must be addressed to make sure that the structure is appropriate for the site. Siting trail bridges properly will increase the likelihood that the stream will continue functioning properly and that the bridge will be useful throughout its planned life.Trail bridges that are sited properly are less likely to be damaged or destroyed
during a major flood.

3. A good engineer responsible for selecting a bridge will want to look at wood, steel truss, and concrete cast in place or pre-cast options. They will hear these types of arguments from various bidders:
Owners and specifiers know that prefabricated bridges save engineering expense, require small installation crews and are ready for use faster than conventional bridges,cites the Continental Bridge brochure.
Pre-fab bridges can carry equivalent live loads as concrete structures (up to 60 psf for structures over 50 feet long), enough to support a 10,000 pound vehicle plus 30% impact.
Long term maintenance of steel structures is often quoted by concrete bridge engineers as a liability and major consideration. Most steel bridges are made of a self-weathering steel called CorTen, which oxidizes to form a protective surface not requiring painting. While CorTen offers low long term maintenance, it does have the appearance of rusted steel and may stain abutments. Painted steel structures do require on-going maintenance, and may cause environmental concerns over wetlands.

4. Bridges are among the most challenging elements of multi-use trail design and development because they require an understanding of physics, architecture and engineering. At the same time, bridges can be some of the most memorable features of a multi-use trail¡ªespecially if they offer compelling views or if the structures themselves are historically or architecturally interesting.

