1. An elevated, fixed-plank structure, usually built on pilings in areas of wet soil or water to provide dry crossings.

2. Boardwalk is most often used as a trail surface for segments through wetlands, as it allows adequate drainage and impacts the fragile ecosystem less than other surface types. However, it can be slippery when wet and is quite expensive to install and maintain.

3. Boardwalks are used to span unavoidable wet areas or depressions. They also can be used to provide trail in areas where grading and filling might harm tree roots or create trail surface that wildlife such as amphibians will not cross. Footings vary depending on soil conditions. Plastic lumber is more expensive than wood but very long-lasting for deck boards. Its heavier weight can help avoid floating in sites that flood and the pronounced texture can reduce slippery surfaces. Check test
results on new products to find the least slippery product and maintain as recommended. Wood surfaces in shaded or moist sites may become slick or even grow
moss. This can be managed by attaching 1/2¡± hardware cloth (wire mesh), especially where boardwalks follow creek grade. Fasten with 1 1/2¡± heavy-duty staples approximately 8 - 12¡± apart. Upper side of mesh should have wires perpendicular to direction of travel. Ends of hardware cloth should be tucked between deck boards or lapped over sides and stapled every 4 - 6¡±. Paint with sand texture may also help, depending on site conditions. An annual cleaning (after autumn leaves fall) is recommended. A kick rail is particularly important along accessible trails where it helps people using canes or wheelchairs stay on the structure.

4. Asphalt pathways, crushed stone trails and bark mulch are all installed on grade, which makes them more susceptible to washouts from heavy rains or nearby sources of flowing water. If your multi use trail project extends over several miles, chances are high that at some point in the trail, you¡¯ll need to design a swale or stream crossing, where an elevated boardwalk is necessary. Commercial boardwalks, whether they¡¯re built with wood, composite or concrete, are more expensive than asphalt, compacted stone or bark mulch trails. While boardwalks are not suited to every environment or project, when designed and installed properly, they do have advantages in longevity and maintenance demands as part of larger, multi use trails. For example, unlike asphalt or stoner fine trails, elevated boardwalks don¡¯t require a prepared sub grade base, which can alleviate the impact on surrounding marsh, wetland or vegetation areas. Also, without limiting a trail¡¯s alignment, elevated boardwalks allow for continuous drainage and unimpeded stream flow. 

